Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
the regulation of body fluid volume and osmolality.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Describe how the kidney separately regulates the volume and the osmolality of the
body fluids.
The kidney regulates two distinct, though related,
properties of the body fluids — their volume and their osmolality — and it does so
by largely separate mechanisms, sensing different variables and adjusting different
things, a distinction fundamental to understanding fluid balance.
The osmolality — the concentration of the body fluids — is regulated chiefly by
controlling water: it is sensed by the osmoreceptors in the hypothalamus,
and regulated by adjusting water intake, through thirst, and water excretion,
through antidiuretic hormone, which controls the reabsorption of water in the
collecting duct — so the body defends its osmolality by handling water.
The volume — more precisely the effective circulating volume — is regulated chiefly
by controlling sodium, since sodium and its accompanying water determine the
extracellular fluid volume: it is sensed by the baroreceptors and volume receptors
and by the kidney itself, and regulated by adjusting sodium excretion,
through the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, the sympathetic nervous system,
the natriuretic peptides and pressure natriuresis.
So the kidney regulates osmolality by handling water — sensed by hypothalamic
osmoreceptors and controlled by thirst and antidiuretic hormone — and regulates
volume by handling sodium — sensed by baroreceptors and volume receptors and
controlled by the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system and others;
two separate but interacting control systems,
the confusion of which underlies many disorders of fluid balance.
Describe the regulation of sodium and the extracellular fluid volume.
The regulation of the extracellular fluid volume is achieved chiefly through the
control of sodium balance, because sodium is the principal osmotically-active
solute of the extracellular fluid, so the total body sodium determines the volume,
and the kidney adjusts sodium excretion to match intake and defend the volume.
The amount of sodium in the body is sensed indirectly,
through the effective circulating volume, by the arterial baroreceptors,
the volume receptors in the great veins and atria,
and the renal sensors including the juxtaglomerular apparatus.
When the effective circulating volume falls,
several mechanisms act to retain sodium:
the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system is activated,
aldosterone increasing sodium reabsorption in the distal nephron;
the sympathetic activity increases,
reducing renal blood flow and filtration and increasing reabsorption;
and the natriuretic peptides fall.
When the volume is expanded, these reverse, and the natriuretic peptides increase,
promoting sodium excretion, together with pressure natriuresis.
The kidney can vary its sodium excretion enormously,
from almost nothing to large amounts, to match intake.
So the extracellular fluid volume is regulated through sodium balance:
a fall in effective circulating volume,
sensed by the baroreceptors and volume and renal sensors,
activates the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system and the sympathetic nervous
system to retain sodium, while volume expansion promotes excretion through the
natriuretic peptides and pressure natriuresis — the kidney adjusting sodium
excretion to defend the volume, central to fluid balance and to oedema and
hypertension.
Describe the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system.
The renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system is the principal hormonal system for the
regulation of sodium balance, the extracellular fluid volume and the blood
pressure, a cascade activated when the circulating volume or pressure falls.
The cascade begins with renin, an enzyme secreted by the juxtaglomerular cells of
the afferent arteriole in response to three stimuli:
a fall in the arteriolar pressure, a reduced sodium chloride delivery sensed by the
macula densa, and sympathetic stimulation.
Renin acts on its substrate, angiotensinogen, from the liver,
to form angiotensin one; this is then converted, chiefly in the lungs,
by the angiotensin-converting enzyme, to the active angiotensin two.
Angiotensin two has several actions that defend the volume and pressure:
it is a potent vasoconstrictor, raising the blood pressure;
it constricts the efferent arteriole, helping maintain filtration;
it directly increases sodium reabsorption in the proximal tubule;
it stimulates thirst and antidiuretic hormone;
and it stimulates the adrenal cortex to secrete aldosterone.
Aldosterone acts on the distal nephron to increase the reabsorption of sodium,
and the secretion of potassium and hydrogen ions.
So the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system is activated by a fall in renal
arteriolar pressure, sodium delivery or by sympathetic stimulation:
renin generates angiotensin two, which constricts vessels, maintains filtration,
promotes sodium reabsorption and thirst, and stimulates aldosterone,
which increases distal sodium reabsorption — a cascade defending the volume and
blood pressure, and a major target of cardiovascular drugs.
Describe the regulation of osmolality by antidiuretic hormone and thirst.
The osmolality of the body fluids is regulated with great precision,
within a narrow range, by a system that controls water balance through antidiuretic
hormone and thirst, governed by the hypothalamic osmoreceptors.
The osmolality is sensed by osmoreceptors in the hypothalamus,
which respond to changes in the effective osmolality of the plasma.
When the osmolality rises — as with water deprivation — two responses are triggered.
First, the secretion of antidiuretic hormone, also called vasopressin,
from the posterior pituitary, is increased;
this hormone acts on the collecting duct to increase its water permeability,
by inserting water channels, so that water is reabsorbed and a concentrated urine
is formed, conserving water and lowering the osmolality.
Second, thirst is stimulated, increasing water intake.
When the osmolality falls, antidiuretic hormone is suppressed,
so the collecting duct becomes impermeable to water and a large volume of dilute
urine is excreted, removing the excess water; and thirst is absent.
The system is sensitive to small changes in osmolality,
and antidiuretic hormone is also released by a large fall in volume,
overriding the osmotic control.
So osmolality is regulated by the hypothalamic osmoreceptors, which,
on a rise in osmolality, stimulate antidiuretic hormone — increasing water
reabsorption in the collecting duct to concentrate the urine — and thirst;
and on a fall, suppress antidiuretic hormone to excrete dilute urine;
a precise control of water balance defending the osmolality,
overridden by large volume changes.
Describe the countercurrent mechanism and how the kidney concentrates urine.
The ability of the kidney to produce a concentrated urine, conserving water,
depends on the generation of a high osmolality in the medulla by the countercurrent
mechanism, one of the more elegant arrangements in physiology.
The principle is that the loop of Henle acts as a countercurrent multiplier to
build up a gradient of increasing osmolality from the cortex to the deep medulla.
The thick ascending limb actively pumps sodium,
potassium and chloride out of the tubule into the medullary interstitium,
but is impermeable to water; this makes the interstitium hyperosmotic and the
tubular fluid dilute.
The descending limb, permeable to water,
allows water to leave so its fluid equilibrates with the rising interstitial
osmolality.
Because the two limbs run in opposite directions — countercurrent — the small
gradient created at each level is multiplied along the length of the loop,
building a steep gradient, the deep medulla reaching a very high osmolality.
Urea contributes.
The vasa recta, also running countercurrent,
supply the medulla without washing out the gradient.
Then, when antidiuretic hormone makes the collecting duct permeable,
water is drawn out of it as it passes through this hyperosmotic medulla,
concentrating the urine.
So the countercurrent multiplier of the loop of Henle, with its water-impermeable,
salt-pumping ascending limb and water-permeable descending limb running in opposite
directions, builds a steep osmotic gradient in the medulla,
preserved by the vasa recta; so that, under antidiuretic hormone,
water is drawn out of the collecting duct passing through it,
concentrating the urine — the mechanism of water conservation.
Describe the concept of free water clearance.
Free water clearance is a concept used to quantify the kidney's handling of water
independently of solute, expressing whether the kidney is, on balance,
excreting or conserving water relative to solute,
which is useful in understanding disorders of water balance.
The idea is to separate the urine into two notional components:
a part that is iso-osmotic with plasma — containing all the excreted solute at the
plasma osmolality — and a part that is pure water, free of solute,
which has been either added to or subtracted from that iso-osmotic part.
The free water clearance is this pure-water component.
When the kidney is excreting dilute urine — getting rid of excess water — the free
water clearance is positive, indicating that solute-free water is being cleared
from the body.
When the kidney is conserving water and excreting concentrated urine,
the free water clearance is negative — sometimes expressed as the generation of
negative free water, or solute-free water reabsorption — indicating that water is
being retained relative to solute.
When the urine is iso-osmotic, the free water clearance is zero.
It is calculated from the urine flow and the urine and plasma osmolalities.
So free water clearance quantifies the renal handling of water independently of
solute: positive when dilute urine is excreted and solute-free water is being
cleared, negative when concentrated urine is formed and water is conserved,
and zero when the urine is iso-osmotic — a concept clarifying the kidney's
regulation of water balance and useful in disorders of osmolality.
Pull it together: how does the kidney integrate the control of volume and
osmolality?
I would draw it together around the kidney as the effector that defends both the
volume and the osmolality of the body fluids,
by the largely separate handling of sodium and of water,
integrated to maintain the internal environment.
The osmolality is defended by handling water: the hypothalamic osmoreceptors,
sensing the concentration, adjust antidiuretic hormone and thirst,
so that the collecting duct, exploiting the medullary gradient built by the
countercurrent multiplier, reabsorbs more or less water to concentrate or dilute
the urine — keeping the osmolality within a narrow range.
The volume is defended by handling sodium: the baroreceptors,
volume receptors and renal sensors, sensing the effective circulating volume,
adjust the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system,
the sympathetic activity and the natriuretic peptides,
so that sodium excretion is matched to intake — defending the volume.
The two systems interact: a large fall in volume overrides the osmotic control,
releasing antidiuretic hormone even at a low osmolality,
prioritising the defence of the circulation.
So the kidney integrates the control of osmolality — by handling water through
antidiuretic hormone, thirst and the countercurrent mechanism — and of volume — by
handling sodium through the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system and others;
the two largely separate but interacting,
with the defence of the circulating volume taking priority — an integration
maintaining the volume and composition of the body fluids.
Describe the atrial natriuretic peptide and the natriuretic peptide system.
The natriuretic peptides are a counter-regulatory hormonal system that promotes the
excretion of sodium and water and opposes the volume-retaining and vasoconstrictor
systems, helping to defend against volume overload.
The principal one for volume regulation is atrial natriuretic peptide,
synthesised and stored in the cardiac atria and released when they are stretched by
an increased filling — that is, by an expanded blood volume; a related peptide,
the brain, or B-type, natriuretic peptide,
comes chiefly from the ventricles and is released in heart failure.
The actions of these peptides oppose the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system.
In the kidney, atrial natriuretic peptide increases the glomerular filtration rate,
by dilating the afferent and constricting the efferent arteriole,
and directly reduces sodium reabsorption in the collecting duct,
so promoting a natriuresis and diuresis.
Elsewhere, it causes vasodilatation, lowering the blood pressure,
and it inhibits renin and aldosterone secretion and the action of antidiuretic
hormone. So its overall effect is to reduce the blood volume and pressure when
these are raised.
So the natriuretic peptides — atrial natriuretic peptide from the stretched atria,
and B-type from the ventricles — are released by volume expansion and cardiac
stretch, and oppose the renin-angiotensin system: increasing the filtration rate,
reducing collecting-duct sodium reabsorption to cause a natriuresis,
and causing vasodilatation while inhibiting renin,
aldosterone and antidiuretic hormone — a counter-regulatory system defending
against volume overload.
Describe pressure natriuresis and the long-term control of blood pressure.
Pressure natriuresis is the phenomenon by which a rise in the arterial pressure
causes the kidney to excrete more sodium and water, and it is,
according to the influential analysis of Guyton,
the basis of the long-term control of the arterial blood pressure,
giving the kidney a central role.
The phenomenon is that, when the arterial pressure rises,
the kidney increases its excretion of sodium and water — even a modest rise in
pressure producing a marked increase in sodium excretion — through several
mechanisms, including the effect of pressure on the medullary blood flow and on
tubular reabsorption.
The consequence for blood-pressure control is profound.
Because the blood volume depends on the balance of sodium and water intake and
excretion, and pressure natriuresis links the excretion to the pressure,
the system acts as a powerful negative feedback with effectively infinite gain over
the long term: if the pressure is too high,
the kidney excretes sodium and water until the volume, and so the pressure, falls;
if too low, it retains them until the pressure rises.
So the long-term blood pressure settles at the point where the kidney's pressure
natriuresis matches the sodium and water intake.
This implies that sustained hypertension requires a resetting of the renal
pressure-natriuresis relationship.
So pressure natriuresis is the increased renal excretion of sodium and water when
the arterial pressure rises; by linking excretion to pressure,
it provides a powerful long-term feedback control of blood pressure through the
blood volume, so that the pressure settles where natriuresis matches intake —
implying that chronic hypertension involves a resetting of this renal relationship,
the kidney being central to long-term pressure control.
Describe the receptors that sense the body fluid volume.
The regulation of the extracellular fluid volume requires that the volume — or
rather the adequacy of the circulating volume — be sensed,
and this is done by a set of receptors at various points in the circulation,
since there is no direct sensor of total body sodium or volume.
The body senses the effective circulating volume — the volume effectively filling
the arterial circulation — indirectly, through pressure and stretch.
The high-pressure baroreceptors, in the carotid sinus and aortic arch,
sense the arterial pressure and, through it, the adequacy of the arterial filling;
a fall reduces their discharge, triggering volume-conserving responses.
The low-pressure volume receptors, in the walls of the great veins,
the atria and the pulmonary vessels, sense the filling, or stretch, of the central,
capacitance side of the circulation, reflecting the venous volume; their stretch,
with volume expansion, triggers natriuretic responses,
including the release of atrial natriuretic peptide and the suppression of
antidiuretic hormone.
The kidney itself senses its perfusion, through the juxtaglomerular apparatus.
These signals are integrated to adjust sodium and water handling.
So the body fluid volume is sensed indirectly, as the effective circulating volume,
by the high-pressure arterial baroreceptors sensing arterial filling,
the low-pressure volume receptors in the veins,
atria and pulmonary vessels sensing central filling,
and the kidney sensing its own perfusion;
these signals being integrated to control sodium and water handling — the afferent
limb of volume regulation.
Describe the mechanism of thirst.
Thirst is the conscious sensation that drives the seeking and drinking of water,
and it is the behavioural counterpart to antidiuretic hormone in the regulation of
water balance, controlled by similar stimuli,
and important to the maintenance of fluid balance.
Thirst is controlled by centres in the hypothalamus,
close to those producing antidiuretic hormone,
and it is stimulated by the same two principal stimuli.
The first and most sensitive is a rise in the plasma osmolality,
sensed by the hypothalamic osmoreceptors: even a small rise in osmolality,
as with water deprivation or salt loading, stimulates thirst,
driving water intake to dilute the body fluids back towards normal.
The second is a fall in the effective circulating volume, or blood pressure,
sensed by the baroreceptors and mediated partly by angiotensin two,
which is a potent stimulus to thirst — so that significant hypovolaemia provokes
thirst even without a rise in osmolality.
Dryness of the mouth and other local sensations also contribute.
The drinking of water is then terminated,
before the absorbed water has had time to correct the osmolality,
by signals from the mouth and gut, preventing overdrinking.
So thirst, controlled by the hypothalamus,
is stimulated by a rise in plasma osmolality, sensed by the osmoreceptors,
and by a fall in circulating volume,
mediated by the baroreceptors and angiotensin two;
driving water intake to defend the body fluids,
and terminated by oropharyngeal signals — the behavioural complement to
antidiuretic hormone in water balance.
Describe diabetes insipidus.
Diabetes insipidus is a disorder of water balance characterised by the production
of large volumes of dilute urine, owing to a failure of the antidiuretic hormone
system, and it illustrates, by its absence,
the role of that hormone in concentrating the urine.
Because the action of antidiuretic hormone is to make the collecting duct permeable
to water and so concentrate the urine,
its failure means that water cannot be reabsorbed there,
so a large volume of inappropriately dilute urine is produced — polyuria — with a
consequent tendency to dehydration and a rise in plasma osmolality and sodium,
which drives a great thirst and excessive drinking, polydipsia.
There are two forms.
Cranial, or central, diabetes insipidus is due to a failure of the production or
release of antidiuretic hormone by the hypothalamus and posterior pituitary — from
injury, surgery, tumours or other damage;
it responds to the administration of the hormone or its analogue, desmopressin.
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus is due to a failure of the kidney to respond to
antidiuretic hormone, the hormone being present but ineffective — from inherited
defects, or from drugs such as lithium, or electrolyte disturbances;
it does not respond to the hormone.
So diabetes insipidus is the production of large volumes of dilute urine from a
failure of the antidiuretic hormone system — cranial,
from deficient hormone production, responding to desmopressin; or nephrogenic,
from renal unresponsiveness to the hormone — causing polyuria,
dehydration and thirst, demonstrating by its absence the role of antidiuretic
hormone in water conservation.
Describe the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion.
The syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion is, in effect,
the opposite of diabetes insipidus:
an excess of antidiuretic hormone action causing water retention,
and it is a common cause of low plasma sodium,
of relevance in the perioperative period.
In this syndrome, antidiuretic hormone is secreted, or acts,
inappropriately — that is, when the plasma osmolality is normal or low,
when it should be suppressed.
The persistent action of the hormone on the collecting duct causes continued water
reabsorption and the production of a concentrated urine despite the body being
overloaded with water; the retained water dilutes the body fluids,
causing a fall in the plasma osmolality and sodium — a hyponatraemia,
which is the hallmark and which, if severe,
causes cerebral oedema and neurological symptoms.
The retained water expands the volume only modestly,
because the natriuretic responses promote sodium excretion,
so the patient is not usually oedematous.
The causes are many: certain tumours secreting the hormone, lung and brain disease,
drugs, pain, nausea and the stress of surgery — so it is common postoperatively,
compounded by the injudicious administration of hypotonic fluid.
So the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion is the
inappropriate secretion or action of the hormone despite a normal or low
osmolality, causing water retention, a concentrated urine,
and a dilutional hyponatraemia that can cause cerebral oedema;
common postoperatively from pain, nausea, stress and drugs,
and worsened by hypotonic fluids — an important cause of perioperative
hyponatraemia.
Describe the disturbances of plasma sodium — hyponatraemia and hypernatraemia.
Disturbances of the plasma sodium concentration are among the commonest electrolyte
abnormalities, and understanding them requires remembering that the plasma sodium
concentration reflects the balance of sodium and water,
and is chiefly a disorder of water, not of sodium content.
The plasma sodium concentration is the ratio of sodium to water,
so it is determined mainly by water balance,
regulated by antidiuretic hormone and thirst, rather than by the total body sodium,
which determines volume.
Hyponatraemia, a low plasma sodium,
is therefore usually a disorder of water excess relative to sodium:
it arises when water is retained, as in the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic
hormone secretion, in heart failure and cirrhosis with impaired water excretion,
and with the intake of water exceeding the kidney's ability to excrete it;
it may occur with a low, normal or high total body sodium.
Its danger is cerebral oedema, as water moves into the brain,
causing neurological symptoms, especially if it develops rapidly.
Hypernatraemia, a high plasma sodium,
is usually a disorder of water deficit relative to sodium: from a loss of water,
as in diabetes insipidus or inadequate water intake,
the body fluids becoming concentrated; its danger is cerebral dehydration.
Both must be corrected at an appropriate rate,
since too-rapid correction is itself harmful.
So plasma sodium disturbances are chiefly disorders of water balance:
hyponatraemia usually from water excess relative to sodium — as in inappropriate
antidiuretic hormone secretion or impaired water excretion — risking cerebral
oedema; and hypernatraemia from water deficit — as in diabetes insipidus or
inadequate intake — risking cerebral dehydration;
both requiring correction at a controlled rate, common and important disturbances.
Describe the phenomenon of aldosterone escape.
Aldosterone escape is the phenomenon by which the sodium-retaining effect of a
sustained excess of aldosterone is limited,
so that the body does not go on accumulating sodium and fluid indefinitely,
and it explains why mineralocorticoid excess does not usually cause gross oedema.
Aldosterone acts on the distal nephron to increase sodium reabsorption,
so a raised level of aldosterone, as in primary hyperaldosteronism or with
sustained stimulation, initially causes sodium and water retention,
expanding the extracellular fluid volume and tending to raise the blood pressure.
However, this retention does not continue indefinitely; after a few days,
sodium excretion returns towards balance despite the continuing high aldosterone —
the body escapes from the sodium-retaining effect.
The mechanisms of this escape include the increase in the glomerular filtration
rate and the pressure natriuresis resulting from the raised blood pressure and the
expanded volume, and the increased release of natriuretic peptides,
which together promote sodium excretion and offset the aldosterone-driven
reabsorption.
The escape limits the volume expansion,
so that primary hyperaldosteronism causes hypertension but not usually marked
oedema. Notably, the potassium-losing effect of aldosterone does not escape,
so hypokalaemia persists.
So aldosterone escape is the limitation, after a few days,
of the sodium-retaining effect of a sustained aldosterone excess,
through pressure natriuresis from the raised pressure and expanded volume and
through natriuretic peptides; it prevents indefinite sodium accumulation,
so mineralocorticoid excess causes hypertension but not gross oedema,
while the potassium loss, which does not escape,
persists — a phenomenon explaining the clinical picture of hyperaldosteronism.
Describe the formation of oedema and the role of the kidney.
Oedema — the accumulation of excess fluid in the interstitial space — is a common
clinical problem, and its formation is best understood through the Starling forces
governing fluid exchange across the capillary,
with the kidney playing a permissive role through sodium retention.
Fluid exchange across the capillary is governed by the balance of the hydrostatic
and oncotic pressures — the Starling forces.
Oedema forms when this balance is disturbed so that filtration into the
interstitium exceeds the capacity of the lymphatics to remove it.
The disturbances that cause oedema are: a raised capillary hydrostatic pressure,
as in venous obstruction or heart failure, or from fluid overload;
a reduced plasma oncotic pressure, as in hypoalbuminaemia from the nephrotic
syndrome or liver disease; an increased capillary permeability, as in inflammation;
and lymphatic obstruction.
Crucially, generalised oedema requires the retention of sodium and water by the
kidney to provide the excess fluid; so the kidney has a permissive,
and often a primary, role: in heart failure, cirrhosis and the nephrotic syndrome,
the reduced effective circulating volume drives renal sodium and water retention,
which both expands the volume and provides the fluid that accumulates as oedema.
So oedema forms when the Starling balance favours net filtration into the
interstitium beyond the lymphatic capacity — from a raised capillary hydrostatic
pressure, a reduced plasma oncotic pressure, increased permeability,
or lymphatic obstruction; and its generalised forms depend on renal sodium and
water retention, driven by a reduced effective circulating volume,
to supply the fluid — the kidney having a permissive and often primary role in
oedema.
Describe the handling of fluid and the stress response in the perioperative period.
The perioperative period is characterised by hormonal and renal changes that
promote the retention of sodium and water,
an understanding of which is important for the rational management of fluids around
surgery.
Surgery provokes a neuroendocrine stress response:
the secretion of antidiuretic hormone is increased — by the pain, the anxiety,
the surgical stimulation, nausea, and any hypovolaemia — promoting water retention;
and the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system and the sympathetic nervous system are
activated, promoting sodium retention.
The result is a tendency to retain sodium and water for a few days after surgery,
with a reduced urine output that is, to a degree,
a normal and expected response rather than necessarily a sign of hypovolaemia.
This has implications for fluid management.
On the one hand, an adequate circulating volume must be maintained,
replacing losses, to preserve perfusion.
On the other hand, because of the tendency to retain water and sodium,
the injudicious administration of large volumes of fluid,
particularly of hypotonic fluid, risks fluid overload and hyponatraemia — the
retained water diluting the sodium.
So perioperative fluids should be given thoughtfully,
matching the losses and the needs, neither under- nor over-loading.
So the perioperative period is marked by a stress-induced increase in antidiuretic
hormone and activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone and sympathetic
systems, promoting sodium and water retention with a reduced urine output that is
partly a normal response; so fluids must be managed carefully — maintaining
perfusion while avoiding the overload and hyponatraemia that excess,
especially hypotonic, fluid would cause — a rational basis for perioperative fluid
therapy.
Describe the principles of perioperative fluid therapy.
The rational administration of fluid in the perioperative period rests on
understanding what fluid is needed, of what kind, and in what amount,
drawing on the physiology of the body fluid compartments and their regulation.
The aims are to maintain or restore an adequate circulating volume and tissue
perfusion, and to provide the maintenance requirements,
while avoiding both under-resuscitation and overload.
Several components are considered.
The maintenance requirement replaces the obligatory daily losses of water and
electrolytes — urine, and insensible losses — given as a balanced fluid in modest
amounts. Pre-existing deficits, from fasting, vomiting or bowel preparation,
are replaced.
Ongoing losses during surgery — blood loss,
and the loss of fluid into the tissues and from exposed surfaces — are replaced,
blood loss with appropriate fluid or blood.
The choice of fluid matters: balanced crystalloids,
closer in composition to the extracellular fluid,
are generally preferred over large volumes of normal saline,
which can cause a hyperchloraemic acidosis, and over hypotonic fluids,
which risk hyponatraemia.
The trend is towards a goal-directed approach,
titrating fluid to measures of the circulation and fluid responsiveness rather than
to fixed formulae, avoiding the harm of both too little and too much.
So perioperative fluid therapy aims to maintain perfusion and provide maintenance
needs while avoiding under-resuscitation and overload:
replacing maintenance requirements, pre-existing deficits and ongoing losses,
preferring balanced crystalloids to large volumes of saline or hypotonic fluid,
and increasingly using a goal-directed approach titrated to the circulation — the
rational application of fluid physiology to the surgical patient.
Describe the concept of fluid responsiveness and its assessment.
Fluid responsiveness is the concept, central to modern fluid management,
of whether a given patient's cardiac output will actually increase in response to a
fluid load, and its assessment allows fluid to be given to those who will benefit
and withheld from those who will not, avoiding the harm of unnecessary fluid.
The rationale rests on the Frank-Starling relationship:
a fluid bolus increases the cardiac preload,
and whether this increases the stroke volume depends on where the heart is
operating on its Starling curve.
On the steep part of the curve, an increase in preload increases the stroke volume
substantially — the patient is fluid-responsive and will benefit from fluid.
On the flat part, an increase in preload produces little increase in stroke volume
— the patient is not fluid-responsive,
and further fluid will only cause overload without benefit.
The aim is to identify which state the patient is in.
Static measures, such as the central venous pressure, are poor predictors.
Better are the dynamic measures, which assess the response to a real or simulated
change in preload: the variation in the stroke volume or pulse pressure with the
respiratory cycle in a ventilated patient, the response to a passive leg raise,
or the response to a small fluid challenge.
So fluid responsiveness is whether the cardiac output will rise with a fluid load,
depending, by the Frank-Starling relationship,
on whether the heart is on the steep or the flat part of its curve;
assessed not by static measures like the central venous pressure but by dynamic
measures — the respiratory stroke-volume or pulse-pressure variation,
the passive leg raise, or a fluid challenge — allowing fluid to be targeted to
those who will benefit, the basis of rational, goal-directed fluid therapy.
Describe the body fluid compartments and how their volumes are measured,
as they relate to renal regulation.
It is worth recalling the body fluid compartments and their measurement,
since the kidney's regulation of volume and osmolality acts upon them,
and the distribution of administered fluid between them follows from their
properties.
The total body water, about sixty per cent of body weight in a man,
is divided into two main compartments. The intracellular fluid,
about two-thirds of the total, is the fluid within the cells.
The extracellular fluid, about one-third, is divided into the interstitial fluid,
between the cells, and the smaller plasma volume, within the vessels,
separated by the capillary wall.
The compartments are separated by membranes with different permeabilities:
the cell membrane, freely permeable to water but maintaining ionic gradients,
so that water distributes according to osmolality; and the capillary wall,
permeable to water and small solutes but not to protein.
The volumes are measured by the dilution principle,
using markers that distribute in a particular compartment — for total body water,
a marker distributing through all the water; for the extracellular fluid,
a marker confined to it; the intracellular volume obtained by difference.
This distribution governs the fate of administered fluids:
water distributes through all compartments,
isotonic saline stays in the extracellular fluid, and colloid is retained,
at least transiently, in the plasma.
So the body water is divided into the intracellular fluid — two-thirds — and the
extracellular fluid — one-third, comprising the interstitial fluid and the plasma —
separated by the water-permeable cell membrane and the protein-impermeable
capillary wall; their volumes measured by dilution;
and the kidney's regulation of volume and osmolality,
and the distribution of administered fluids,
acting upon these compartments — the framework underlying fluid balance and therapy.
Summarise the integrated renal response to a sudden loss of blood volume.
It is worth integrating the renal contribution to the response to a sudden loss of
blood volume, since it draws together the volume and osmolality mechanisms in a
single, coordinated defence of the circulation.
When blood is lost, the fall in the effective circulating volume and arterial
pressure is sensed by the arterial baroreceptors,
the low-pressure volume receptors, and the kidney itself.
The integrated response conserves both salt and water.
The sympathetic nervous system is activated, constricting the renal arterioles,
reducing the filtration and directly stimulating sodium reabsorption,
and stimulating renin.
The renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system is activated:
angiotensin two constricts the efferent arteriole to preserve filtration and
promotes proximal sodium reabsorption and thirst,
while aldosterone increases distal sodium reabsorption.
Antidiuretic hormone is released — driven now by the large volume stimulus
overriding the osmotic control — promoting water reabsorption and thirst.
The natriuretic peptides fall.
The result is the production of a small volume of concentrated, sodium-poor urine,
conserving salt and water to help restore the volume,
alongside the cardiovascular reflexes.
So the renal response to blood loss is an integrated, volume-conserving defence:
sympathetic and angiotensin-mediated vasoconstriction preserving filtration,
and aldosterone, angiotensin and antidiuretic hormone driving sodium and water
retention with thirst — producing concentrated,
sodium-poor urine to help restore the circulating volume,
the renal limb of the response to haemorrhage.
Thank you. An excellent account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, The kidney separately regulates osmolality (by handling water — sensed by
hypothalamic osmoreceptors, controlled by thirst and ADH acting on the collecting
duct) and volume (by handling sodium — the principal ECF solute,
sensed by baroreceptors/volume/renal sensors,
controlled by the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, sympathetic nerves,
natriuretic peptides and pressure natriuresis).
Second, ECF volume is regulated through sodium balance:
a fall in effective circulating volume activates renin-angiotensin-aldosterone and
sympathetic activity to retain sodium,
while volume expansion promotes excretion (natriuretic peptides,
pressure natriuresis); the kidney can vary sodium excretion enormously to match
intake.
Third, Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone: renin (from JG cells,
released by low arteriolar pressure, low macula densa NaCl,
or sympathetic stimulation) → angiotensin I → (ACE,
lungs) angiotensin II — a vasoconstrictor that maintains filtration (efferent
constriction), promotes proximal Na reabsorption, thirst and ADH,
and stimulates aldosterone (distal Na reabsorption, K+/H+ secretion);
a major cardiovascular drug target.
Fourth, Osmolality is regulated by hypothalamic osmoreceptors:
a rise stimulates ADH (vasopressin) — inserting water channels in the collecting
duct to reabsorb water and concentrate the urine — and thirst;
a fall suppresses ADH (dilute urine).
Concentration depends on the medullary gradient built by the countercurrent
multiplier (loop of Henle: water-impermeable,
salt-pumping ascending limb + water-permeable descending limb running
countercurrent), preserved by the vasa recta.
Fifth, Free water clearance quantifies water handling independent of solute:
positive (dilute urine, clearing solute-free water), negative (concentrated urine,
conserving water), or zero (iso-osmotic).
Volume and osmolality control interact — a large fall in volume overrides osmotic
control, releasing ADH even at low osmolality to prioritise the circulation.
Thank you. That concludes the station.